Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Giovanni Rolo. He's professor
of philosophy at Federal University of Bahia in Brazil,
and today we're going to talk about in activism,
ecological psychology, and embodied cognition and the combination of
them. So, uh, Giovanni, welcome to the show. It's
a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much, Ricardo. It's uh lovely to
be here. I'm very glad that you invited me.
It's uh an amazing opportunity to talk about my
work and I am so glad to be here.
Sure, it's my pleasure. So, let me ask you
first about an activism. So what is an activism
and by the way, what got you interested in
an activism as an approach in cognitive science?
OK, so, well, to put it simply, an activism
is a relatively recent approach to the cognitive sciences
and philosophy of the mind, let's say in the
last 30 years, a little bit more. And it
emphasizes the continuity between life and mind, autonomous action,
and consequently bodily morphology in its account of cognitive
phenomenon, phenomena. So, um, This is the, the, the
general picture of course there are different branches of
an activism we can talk about that later, but
in general an activists claim that in order to
understand how the mind works we gotta understand how
the organism acts in, in its environment and how
it maintains the dynamics with its, uh, environmental setting.
So and how those dynamics matter for said organism
matter at a very fundamental biological level. So whereas
a more traditional account would explain the cognitive states
as processes uh that have uh let's say semantic
content and carry information for the for the organism
of information about the digital sources of stimuli and
activism takes a different approach and I got into
it because I was. Well, I was interested in
understanding, uh, let's say how, how we could naturalize
perceptual states, uh, how to naturalize perceptual states, and
I saw that as a viable opportunity to, to
let's say to, to, to deal with this issue
from a philosophical standpoint but also a philosophical standpoint
that has scientific uh a very, uh. Let's say
a solid scientific background.
Mhm, BUT I mean since you mentioned that in
activism is a fairly recent approach in cognitive science,
how would you compare it to the more traditional
approaches there and I mean, uh, uh, how much
scientific support would you say it has?
OK, so, basically, I think that. The the main
difference is about. The The foundational question for the
cognitive sciences, which is what is the mind, whereas
a more traditional approach would take it as essentially
a matter of representing the external world and it
is how it is the, the, the outcome of
the, the cognitive revolution in the 50s. And uh
as a way to move beyond behaviorism which would
neglect the kind of internal states that the mind,
the mind supposedly has and that is the, the,
the general picture for the traditional approach that the
mind is a computation machine that uh represent the
external world and this has been the ongoing mainstream
cognitive sciences in the last months. 70 years, 80
years, and in activism, well, it's fairly recent. We
used to say that, uh, the Embodied Mind, the,
the book by Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor
Rush is the, the locus Classicus of the negative
Approach, but also you have earlier work by Francisco
Varela and uh, uh, even before that you have
Gibson working on ecological psychology which is against the
me. The mainstream of the cognitive sciences and from,
well. From the philosophical standpoint, and activism suggests that
change of picture that that's not what the mind
is supposed to do. And then when you look
at the evidence of how organisms behave and how
we could not imple implement and uh. Build artificial
agents based on the. Ancient picture, the cognitivist picture
with the same success as we do in navigating
our environments, this counts as a kind of empirical
evidence, but the, the, the, the turning point is
to think of the mind as not, uh, as
our cognitive systems in general, not as representing the
external world, but as enabling the organism to act
in its environment and for this you need to.
To, to have a body that is, uh, that
sustains a certain dynamic with its environment, so. In
terms of empirical uh support, I would say that
most empirical support comes from the experiments that were
conducted by the ecological psychologists. They are not an
activist, of course, they are in the neighboring, uh,
they, they are a neighboring approach in a way,
but I think that the large amount of evidence
that they have, they have gathered in the last.
Uh, 40 years or so could be used to
support also an activist approach to the cognitive science
because I think cognitive, uh, uh, an activism is
a philosophical, uh, it's an attempt to change the,
the, the point of view of the cognitive science
from the philosophical, uh, point of view. So that's
the, that would, that I would say it's the
main difference.
Mhm. Yes, and we're going to get also into
ecological psychology later in our conversation, but so do
you think then that an activism has the potential
to provide us with a stronger or more robust
explanatory framework of the mind than uh cognitivism and
computational slash representational approaches to the mind?
I think at least it has the potential to
offer a different picture. OK, and maybe we will
need, uh, to assume a pluralist stance and try
to, to analyze different aspects of cognition from different,
uh, standpoints, but at the very least I think
an activism raises important questions about, well, what were
we neglecting in the, the, the old school cognitivist
way of thinking about mind, but Maybe this is
not something that will be settled empirically, I guess
it's something about uh the foundational concepts of well
defining what the mind is and uh defining what
cognition is and of course we can search for
partial evidence that support either, either one of those
those views, but I think. Thinking of the mind
as a computation, uh, a machine that computes information
about the external misses a lot of important things,
and that's what in activism tries to, to bring
forth in this debate.
Oh, OK. And what are some of the things
that, uh, the more traditional approaches miss? Could you
give us some examples just for people to have
a better understanding of what you are talking about
here? Of course, yeah, so when we think about
the mind that way as a machine that computes
information about the external world, we are assuming a
metaphor that the mind is a comp uh computation
machine. It's like a computer, so essentially a computer
with a different. Hardware, let's say a biological hardware
and that would require us to think that limitations
in implementation of this kind of framework in artificial
agents. Uh, SO limitations of implementation in, in this
case would mean that, well, we just need more
processing capacities and that's not it as we have
seen time and time again. Artificial engines, they do
not become more like human when you add more
computation capacities to them because there are a lot
of stuff that we do in our everyday scenarios
like picking up stuff, walking around the busy street
or stuff like that. That is not exactly a
matter of computing external information but also it's a
matter of attuning to environmental dynamics and as I
said in the beginning, in order to do that
you need to have a a embodied agent that
has physical capacities and has to um explore those
possibilities for action and what I think is. If
that was Uh, if Um, Computing external information is
all that we are doing in such cases, then
more processing capacities would be needed to, to deal
with the kind of case that we actually, the,
the kind of stuff we actually do in our
everyday scenarios, but I think that's something that's the
misguided point of view. So that's one point. The
other thing is that when we talk about representing
an external reality, representing an external world, we often
assume, scientists often assume that that's the, the role
of the brain. However, if you look at how
narrow no states. They are activated with. Uh, LET'S
say the execution of a simple task, let's say
perception and picking up some object or opening a
door and stuff like that. Well, neuronsthesis do not
have this semantic capacity of representing something else. They
just, they are, uh, they lit up with, uh,
electrochemical signals, but they are not standing for something
else. This is a conceptual issue. So scientists often
use this vocabulary that is inherited from not only
cognitivism but way before that from modern scientists of
rep of brain states representing the world, but. I
don't think that is also, I don't, I don't
think that's actually correct. I don't think that brain
states represent the external world. I think that they
might covary with certain actions and uh possibilities for
action, but to say that they represent is adding
something more. So in most textbooks you can uh
switch representation of parlance as in brain states represent
external realities. Or brain states representing language or stuff
like that with just activation of neural patterns without
any loss of meaning. So I think that's another
problem, another conceptual problem that people usually import is,
um, metaphysical claim about how the brain works, about
the possibility of having semantic states in our neuronal
patterns of brain activation and stuff like that. Without
actually considering the, the, the implication that, well, physical
matter do not, does not represent the external world.
Mhm. Do you also consider the other three E's
in 4E cognition? I mean, uh, embodied cognition, uh,
extended cognition, and embedded cognition. Of course, uh we're
going to talk more about embodied cognition in a
bit, but do you also consider the other two
E's or not?
Well, I think, uh, usually when you think of
foreign cognitive sciences, we are thinking about embodied cognition
and active cognition embedded and extended, right? So, um.
Some people also had ecological cognition and I don't
know if that was what you were thinking about,
and I've seen talk about emotional cognition in some
places that would make it sexy and also. Um,
I, I, I don't know if we ever get
to 70, but anyways, I, I, I don't like
that label very much because I think that in
activism already implies some variety of embodied cognition, namely
radical embodiment, which is basically this eliminative stance on
mental representations that I was talking about. And on
the other hand, some, some embodied theorists defend a
more conservative view on embodiment, which is. Embodied, uh,
which comprise embodied representations. Think for instance in Barcelo's
work in linguistics that we have embodied representations, but
this goes against an activism. So there's, um, there,
there are fine distinctions that we should make, I
think. And the same thing goes for extended cognition.
If you take for instance Clark and Chalmers' original
work on extended cognition, it is functionalist at score
because it doesn't matter what the hardware is made
of, let's say. It matters how it functions and
so that's why you can have like an external
notebook as a memory instead of only your brain,
but this isn't comfortable with the embodied approach because
the embodied approach rejects functionalism and it claims that
well, the mother, the, the, the, the body is
um fundamental essential for. For cognitive states it's, it's
a constitutive of cognitive states and that the same
thing goes for an activist so. Uh, I try
not to use the term for it anymore. And
uh I think they are more or less. The,
the, the thing is they came about more or
less simultaneously and that's why I think people used
to think that of a single program, but I
think there are many different and I think it's
more important to draw out those lines more clearly.
OK. And uh in your work in cognitive science,
how do you combine them in activism, ecological psychology,
and embodied cognition? I mean, what is the relative
role that each of those frameworks brings into the
picture?
OK, so, um, because I'm a philosopher of cognitive
sciences and, uh, I don't do science myself unfortunately,
much, much agree and I, I'd love to, but,
uh, one thing that I've done in several occasions
is sort of, uh, to look over the shoulder
of what scientists are doing and how they think
certain experimentscorfume or refute certain philosophical claims. Uh, WHICH
is might not be clearly stated to themselves. Sometimes
that's not usually that's not the, the main goal
of the, the scientists to, to refute the philosophical
claim, but sometimes that's the implication, and then I,
uh, I annoyingly say, well, that's not actually right.
You haven't proved that, you haven't refused that. There
is another explanation, and so on. And in doing
so I try to open some theoretical space to
consider alternative explanations for what seems to be settled
phenomena that seemingly can only be explained in one
way or another, so, um. The same thing goes
for embodied cognition. I think embodied cognition goes in
the same direction as a general term for uh
approaches that reconsider the role of the body in
explaining cognitive states and as for ecological psychology, as
I said, I think it's much more empirical than
an activism. And uh it is. Uh, THERE is
a, they, they share some fundamental agreements, of course,
ecological psychologists and activists, they have the same concerns
about what is a viable explanation of how the
mind works in different cases, and it has loads
of empirical evidence to back it up, so which
is always great, and I think ecological psychology, it's
an ally for an activism. Sometimes I have written
in terms of an ecological and active approach or
an active ecological approach whatever. But um. I think
they build a certain picture that can be put
to work together, a very pragmatist picture of how
the mind works that reconsiders the role of the
body and the action of the organism in experimentation.
AND so, uh, earlier you mentioned when I asked
you about who, who, to what extent would, do
you think an activism would be supported by science.
You mentioned that ecological psychology would be the framework
to provide uh an empirical support for an activism.
So what are ecological and active approaches to cognition
then?
Well, OK, so the, the ecological and active approach
tries to combine activism, of course, which is the
claim that cognition emerged from the dynamics between organism
and environment, and from the ecological view you have
the idea that cognitive states. Uh, DETECT or they
involve the detection of information for action and that's
how you can test the, the, the claim, uh,
together they imply that cognition is not in the
head but in the dynamics between the agents and
the environment and to explain these dynamics you use,
you can use the idea of possibilities for action
or affordances and solicitations and that's how you can
test those views by looking at how agents behave
differently in settings where the affordances changes. Uh, THE
furthest has changed and one very famous case, the
experiment where, uh, subjects are, uh, they, they, they
are given backpacks with certain different weights on it
and, uh, the subjects perceive a slope, it's the
same slope for all subjects, but. They perceive it
differently according to the weight of their backpacks, so
that's a very famous, famous kind that you have
several experiments. Uh, THAT that's for instance, the perception
of gaps in the floor if you can jump
then if they are walkable and this relates to
how, um, if I'm not mistaken, of how, how,
uh, elastic is your musculature in your legs or
stuff like that, not your height as one would
suppose, and that's how you can see that the
whole, the, the role of the body in cognition
as changing how objects perceive possibilities for action. And
that's the importance of the ecological and active approach
that uh highlights these aspects so we perceive things
in certain ways because they allow us to act
in certain ways which in turn are constrained by
our bodily morphologies, our current interests and abilities and
this is not to say of course that the
neurodynamics are not important but. They are not the
whole story when we try to understand the mind
and we cannot neglect, neglect the, the, the, the
extra neural body.
Mhm So let me ask you about a topic
that I know you've explored in your work. What
is information in cognitive science? What does it mean
for a cognitive system to acquire information about its
surroundings?
Well, the, the, the notion of information is a
disputable notion because it depends on how you understand
the function of a cognitive system. I mean, it
changes everything, so. A classical view would say that
the function of cognition of a cognitive system. Is
to represent the external world, uh, and in that
view information could be understood as the semantic content
carried by mental representations about the distal source of
stimuli. So when I perceive something, I have a
distal source of stimuli that the, the, the thing
that causes certain representation, certain stimuli in my, let's
say visual perception of my brain, uh, processes this
as information about that thing. So on that view,
a cognitive system acquires information about something, let's say
a given state of affairs. If it has mental
representations that Uh, were acquired through very specific means.
As in this example of visual stimulation. Information would
be the semantic content of mental representations in that
field that takes the mind as a computer that
represents the external world and that would be the
classical view which I think activism has a strong
case to to reject for very specific reasons. I
don't want to uh to enter those reasons, but
basically it's, as I said in the beginning, it's
very hard to. Naturalize this notion of mental representation.
It's very implausible that we, we will ever be
able to do that, and it requires rethinking about
the, the rethinking the role of information for, for
an activism, or we can, I don't think we
should, but some people say that we should, uh.
Uh Forego this notion altogether. I don't think that's
correct. I think we can talk about a plausible
view of information that is not committed to, uh,
uh, semantic content of the excel mode.
OK, and what would such a view be? I
mean, is there an inactive ecological approach because that's
the kind of approach you bring into your work,
uh, to information.
So, um, what I take from radical and activism,
which is one branch of, uh, an activism, the,
the recent branch by Danhuto and Narik Min, is
that information is a matter of covariation between states
of affairs. So my perceptual state of readines to
action, let's say, of grasping an object. Covaries with
the affordances for that object. When I perceive a
cup of water, I have this redness, uh, to
action that varies with my perceptual state. And this,
of course, involves a specific pattern of neuron activation.
But the idea is that nowhere in this picture
we are forced to assume that they stimulate calls
in the representations of external states and uh all
we have here so far is a matter of
covariation and this is scientifically viable. So, assuming that
the environment is favorable to my perception that there
is no, uh, if everything goes all right, let's
say, and that my skill set is sufficiently well
developed. Um, THAT'S the, the part that I developed
with my very good friend Eros Carvallo. I minimize
uncertainty by enacting a certain sensory model scheme, let's
say, uh, extending my arm and grasping that object.
So I see a cup of water and I,
uh, had this redness to action, and I, I
want to grab, this is in my interest to
grasp and to drink the water. I extend my
arm and grasp the, the cup of water. I
am minimizing, uh, uncertainty because. The the action of
that sensor motor scheme. Covaries with the end goal
grasping the object. That's how I, I know that
if I do this, of course I don't need
to represent that consciously. I don't need to think
about that. I just do it, but I know
that, or I have the know-how of extending my
arm and grasping the, the cup of water and
bringing it to my mouth is sufficient to, to,
to my goal. And of course there are many
different actions I could take. In that scenario that
would not lead to the success of drinking the
water. I could just, I could drop it, I
could miss, I could do a lot of stuff
and um. The, the importance of uh embodying know-how
is to minimize uncertainty in this case.
Uh, Tell us more about know-how. I mean, what
is know-how and particularly what is embodied know-how?
OK, so, um. You know how is, of course,
the type of knowledge, it's uh. It, it has
been distinguished from knowing that propositional knowledge. So for
those who are not familiar in, in this literature,
propositional knowledge has been the, the. The main kind
of knowledge is studied in the philosophical debate in
the last 100 years or so, and that is
knowing that something is so and so. Now how
on the other hand, is practical knowledge in principle
at least it seems to be so. It's the
kind of knowledge that implies having an ability to
do something and propositional knowledge, on the other hand,
is a knowledge that something so and so, as
I said, and they seem to be different kinds
of knowledge. However, some have tried to, to reduce
one kind of knowledge to the other. Some have,
some have argued that know-how is no different from
knowing that, and some other philosophers have argued that
those are in fact distinct kinds of knowledge, but
the idea is that. In my take that know-how
is not about representing the world with accuracy and
justification as propositional knowledge, and one example for that
is knowing how to practice a sport. If you
acquire and refine the relevant sets, set of skills,
you don't, you do not need to, to hold
any particular belief about the stuff you are doing.
You just Exercise those skills in playing that sport,
let's say. Uh, FOOTBALL or whatever, tennis, whatever you
think. Of course you can enter that reflective stage
if you are sufficiently proficient in that activity. You
can think about stuff while you are doing, but,
and this actually helps athletes in some cases, but
it is not necessary for you to have that,
uh, it's unnecessary to have success in engaging in
that activity to have this this reflective state. All
you need is the relevant know-how in most cases.
So know-how is practical knowledge and, um. I think
there is no fundamental difference between maybe a matter
of emphasis between know-how and and body know-how because
I think all know-how is ultimately embodied, but it
might seem not to be the case in some
particular cases when we think about, for instance, our
ability to master symbols using a language. It seems
to be disembodied at first glance. It seems that.
It doesn't matter the the body you have in
order to understand a given language, but I think
that misses the bigger part of the picture because,
well, you have to emit sounds and you have
to, to grasp objects and manipulate objects to, to,
to write symbols, so it's not entirely true that
it's not true that, uh, mastering a language is
a matter of disembodying of how so. However, First
appearance, I think that all know-how is embodied. Uh,
IF you take the, the that, well, you need
to have a body to exercise the abilities that
are relevant for know-how. Uh, WELL, please go on.
Uh, NO, I, I mean, do you want to
have something, or?
Well, I mean, I think that's that that's a
bit more, um, it's a bit more bold, but
I think that propositional knowledge also involves know-how, so
propositional knowledge, knowing that er something is the case
involves knowing how to articulate symbols. So I also
think that very indirectly propositional knowledge is also embodied
in a way, but that's very speculative. I, I,
I, I don't have enough uh uh well articulated
reason to. To defend that view, but I think
that ultimately even propositional knowledge is embodied, but in
an indirect manner.
Yeah, uh, tell us about this an activist conception
of bringing forth a world. What does that mean?
Well, OK, so, um, the, the, this phrase bringing
forth a world, it occurs. Uh, AS far as
I can tell, the first time in the, in,
in the Embodied Mind, that book by Francisco Varela,
Evan Thompson, and Eleonor Rush. And it is used
to explain how the inactive conception evades both a
certain realistic climate and then. Uh, uh, uh, AN
idealist inclined views in the, the cognitive science, both
realist and idealist takes in the that that there
are certain undertones in the cognitive sciences of the
day that could go either way. So, uh, the
kind of realism that the authors of The Embodied
Mind were concerned about. Is the view that cognitive
systems, they simply capture the outside world through inner
models or mental representation. So you have the outside
world and the, the role of the cognitive system
is to capture it so that's it, to represent
it to, to, to receive information and rebuild it
in internally as to mirror the outside world. And
the idealist inclined view on the other hand, assumes
that cognitive systems project the inner structure onto the
world. So as they do that, they not only
receive. Information from the outside they also projected onto
how they structured this stimuli. Both are very prevalent
in the cognitive sciences to this day, and you
can see the curse shifting either way depending on
the, the case, so. The point is that in
virtue of the fact that living beings, they explore
the relevant features of the environment as an activists
claim. Uh, THEY bring forth a world of significance.
And this is often understood metaphorically. In most literature
about an activism, this phrase is understood as a
metaphor for perceiving what matters for the organism and
indeed at the time of the embodied mind there
were not many references in evolutionary biology to back
up a more literal control of that claim. But
now we have evolutionary, uh, synthesis, extended evolutionary synthesis,
the view that other factors beyond trait selection should
be accounted to explain evolution, and one of those
factors is niche construction. Uh, THE idea is that
organisms. Affected surroundings by their doings and in doing
so they, they shape their reality by building their
niche, and this changed reality, this cumulatively changed reality
of the world. It, it, it is brought forth
by previous generations and it's a non-generic inheritance that
affects future generations. So it's, uh, this is the
kind of evolutionary dynamics that we, uh, Nara Figueredo,
a good friend of mine and I argued that
it provides some basis for a literal construct of
bringing forth a world. Organisms actually shape the reality,
and this is a fact, this, this is in
fact a matter of not a naive realism, but
a, let's say a constructivist realist, uh, constructivist realism.
That could be understood as the metaphysical, uh, import
of the negative approach to cognitive sciences that we
actually bring forth a world, not only metaphorical but
literally.
Mhm. Uh, ON the topic of evolution, I mean
evolution by natural selection, and you also mentioned there
the extended evolutionary synthesis and Uh, phenomenon like niche
construction. What is evolution as natural drift and tell
us about this idea of how structural couplings between
organism and environment trigger viable pathways of maintenance and
reproduction instead of, uh, simply selecting the most adapted
traits to a pre-given environment.
OK, so, uh, the claimed natural drift, I think,
is the, the, the, the, the phrase natural drift,
the label is the idea that Maturan and Empodos
is developed. I think they, they did so first
in Spanish if I'm not mistaken. And which later
Evan Thompson called an active evolution. And it's a
very programmatic idea that evolution is not the passive
selection of the fittest. But the evolution makes room
for general constraints within which organisms develop the structural
couplings or as I, I've been using the term
dynamics more loosely, but their dynamics with the environment
that allow them to strive and I think natural
gift is an interesting idea. It is underdeveloped, I
think, in the literature, um. It's very programmatic, as
I said, but, uh, to my mind, I, I
think the latest work on it is Evan Thompson's
2007 book that has, it dedicates a few chapters
or sections on it, but, um. The idea is
interesting to account for evolution in a similar way
that. Autopoetic theory accounts for, uh, life in general,
so that's what Matuan and and Podols were trying
to do. But um we try to fit that
in our argument, Na and I. Uh, TO some
success, I think that we recognize that, well, there
is also something here that leads to the inactive
idea that organisms are not simply. Passively, uh, under
environmental constraints they are, they are also acting upon
the environment. So this is how we try to
fit in with the discussion of niche construction, which
is very clearly the idea that the organisms, they
act upon the environment and in so doing they
affect their evolutionary pathways. And it is, of course,
the authors that defend ni niche construction are not
originally concerned with the inactive uh approach or the
debate in the cognitive sciences. Um, AS you look
at work by Laland and others, but even though
they do not use the term an active approach
to evolution, it's very clearly consistent with the stake.
They come from a different background from the evolutionary
biology, but it seems that it is, they are
working in a similar direction as Maura and Empatosis
and later on Varela and Thompson when they were
talking about an active evolution.
And what is then more broadly the link between
in activism and evolutionary dynamics?
Well, um, the, the core activist idea is to
bring the organism, the, the living organism to the
center of the cognitive sciences, which means to think
of living systems not as. Passive recipients of external
forces. And external stimuli, but as creatures that act
upon their environments. So if we extend that view
of life as some people use the term adaptive
autonomy from the cognitive sciences to evolutionary biology, the
idea is that Uh, to think of living systems
as particularly responsible for their evolutionary pathways, of course,
not as if living systems know the end goal
of the evolvolution, of course they do not know
that, but the way they act upon their environment
affects their evolutionary pathways, meaning that they are not
simply subject to evolutionary pressures as the modern evolutionary
synthesis. Would, uh, would claim that we only select
traits that enable survival. Mhm. So, as I said,
I think niche construction is one way to meet
that condition, and I find a lot of similarities
between niche construction theory and the general lines of
the actual an active, uh, theory of evolution and.
That's one way to cash out this idea that
we are. Partially responsible in a, in a sense
that what we do matters for our evolutionary pathways
in the same way that what we do matters
for our self-maintenance as individual systems or uh living
organisms.
Mhm. So, uh, another different kind of topic, do
pre-linguistic infants have representational abilities, and if so, what
do you think would be the implications of that
for an an activist approach to cognition?
OK, so yeah, uh, regarding the, the, the, the
first part of this question. Uh, WELL, if they
did that, would be a problem for those theories
that claim that the language precedes representational abilities. Which
means that our capacity, capacity to represent internally a
given state of affairs is an outcome of mastering
a language. That's my, my view and, and it's
also something that other activists have, have claimed. Um,
In contrast, some cognitivists or most cognitivists would say
that we have an innate ability to represent the
world. This is actually what defines cognativism. So, uh,
some psychologists have tried to show that pre-linguistic children
have. Innate mechanisms to represent the world and they
supposedly have shown that by registering the reaction time
of children when observing normal versus unusual scena scenarios,
uh, they can prove that children have this, uh,
innate mechanisms for physics and, uh, intuitive physics and
stuff like that, so they create very unusual scenarios.
And they and and normal variant of those scenarios
and they register how long it takes children to
observe paralinguistic children 3 or 4 months old, uh,
for how long they, they observe the, the unusual
scenarios in comparison to the usual normal scenarios and
what they noticed is that, um. In normal situations,
the reaction time doesn't change across the board, but
in very, in very unusual scenarios which are designed
by the scientists. To, to be physically impossible, let's
say, by, by, by a matter of trickery they,
uh, use, uh, a very elaborate, uh, settings. The
children keep looking at the scenario for a longer
time, for much longer. So, the interpretation, the the
empirical data is that they are surprised. Uh, BECAUSE
according to the cognitivist, uh, reading of this empirical
data. They. The, the fiscally impossible stuff violates their
expectations, so it means that they can only have,
that it's only possible to explain that by appealing
to certain innate mechanisms that. Are manifested long before
mastering a language. So in a recent paper I
argued that an activism and in body cognition more
generally have the tools to explain that this difference
in reaction time and it undercuts the representation and
its interpretation of the empirical data. One of these
ways is to argue that in those experiments children
must be habituated with the. Then, then Normal scenario,
the, the usual circumstance where nothing magical happens. Before
you measure the difference in uh reaction time and
this habituation that happens over several expositions to that
normal scenario creates a certain pattern, a habitual pattern
of sensor motor schemes if you will, and when
you introduce something radically different, they break this pattern.
This borrows from the work by, by Sel 10
and others. But this is one way to say
that, well, this is not what's happening right now.
It's not a matter of um. Uh, REPRESENTING, uh,
the, the innate mechanism for representation being alert it's
actually the fact that we are breaking the habit
that were that was introduced in the, the experimentation
in the, in the previous phase of the experimentation,
and this is one way to claim that the
other way is to say that well. And I
was following the work by that Nan and I
did together a few years before that that well
we bring forth a very fiscally stable world and
we select by in virtue of that um. Uh,
COGNITIVE, uh, mechanisms to engage with, with a fiscally
stable world. So when something. SEEMINGLY physically impossible happens.
Our cognitive states and our cognitive capacities are not
endowed with, with the, the means to deal with
that, so it's, it's, it's plausible that we even
before mastering a language, there's something. Uh, AWKWARD in
that that, uh, draws our attention, but that's mainly
because over our evolutionary history, the, the, the world
we have been dealing with is very physically stable.
So if one object simply disappears at one end
of the disciplinary and reappears at the other, then
something must be amiss. And this is the kind
of experiment that the psychologists were doing in the
80s. They were doing several different experiments where children
would look at this. Elaborate scenario where things would
disappear or reappear or be um cut in half
and uh and you wouldn't notice that they are
different parts of the same object or stuff like
that. And well, these are the, the two main
explanations that go. Against the mainstream literature in the
cognitive sciences that would say that well of course
they have innate mechanisms to represent the world because
they are surprised and are and my my attempt
is to say well that's it doesn't follow you,
you can have alternative explanations that do not appeal
to representational abilities even in paralinguistic children so it
might still be the case that our representational abilities,
they show up. After we have developed a language
and mastered the public symbols that characterize the language.
Yeah, that's, that's really interesting. So, uh, you mentioned
several times during our conversation, uh, radical inactivism. So
tell us more about that. What is radically inactive
cognition?
Well, the, then the, the, the phrase radical and
active cognition comes from Hutu and Dan Hutu and
Eric Me's work of the book on, uh, radicalizing
activism that was released in 2013 and draw a
lot of attention because. Therein they argue that. Uh,
EVEN some activists, uh, and activists are not being
as radical as they claim because they are making
concessions to, uh, cognitive, cognitivism in their work. So
Hutu and Min, they argue that. They defend the
an eliminative stance on representational content because they argue
that it is impossible to naturalize. Basically the idea
is that, well. Um, I think, I, I said
that at the beginning, but. Representational content implies that
patterns of neuron activation have semantic content and you
cannot find that in nature. You cannot find semantic
content in nature in a way semantic content is
in the eye of the beholder. We ascribe it
to neuron neuro states. We see a pattern of
neuron activation and see the execution of a certain
task or perception of an object, whatever, and we
say that this represents that, but that's our description.
Because we are endowed with a language to do
so and radical and activism is the claim that
even some other activists are actually doing something similar
when attack, for instance, of sense making, which is
a core concept in traditional and activist literature and
this, as I said, drew a lot of attention
because, uh, it is in a way a kind
of friendly fire in the in the activist trenches
against cog cognunitivism because. Well, um, it tries to,
to sanitize an activism from implicit cognitive bias, and
I do not think that that's the case for
sense making exactly. I think we can defend the
idea of sense making as the notion that organisms
perceive. And engage in their environment according to how
those engagements matter to them. And I think that
we can preserve sense-making as something that is in
principle compatible with radical and activism. But some other
works from an activist adjacent literature such as Alva
Know's work on sensory motor and activism. That I
think is more complicated because he claims that perception
is a matter of understanding how. The world would
unfold through my actions and this understanding how even
though it's not at surface level a matter of
propositional knowledge seems to be understanding that the world
will behave so and so if I act so
and so so. Radical activism and activism. Tries to
clean the, the nativist literature from that language and
in so doing, of course, it, it takes a
very. Strong stance against some other and activist approaches.
But basically the idea is that we have no.
Um, We do, we do not have good grounds
to defend, uh, the existence of mental representations, and
we should. Uh, RECTIFY our scientific language from this
usage.
And how about high cognition? Do you think it
can be explained by an activism and embodied cognition?
Well, I think so because uh higher higher cognition
is. Uh, IT depends on how you cut the,
the, where you draw the line between basic or
low and higher cognition, but basically the idea is
that certain aspects of human cognitive performance are radically
different from how other animals behave in their environments,
and the idea of, uh, explaining higher cognition through,
uh, an activist means is. To take a bottom-up
approach that begins with the relation between. Basic biological
processes and basic cognition, basic intentionality, basic, basic kind
of directness to the world. And work upwards toward
towards more complex cases of cognition such as um.
Language use and uh influential abilities and. Reasoning and
counterfactual reasoning and stuff like that, stuff that does
not involve the immediate environment so of course we
are capable of doing those things. I can think
of what I will uh do this weekend or
what I have done in the past or if
something happens I will do something else. So all
of these cases they are at surface at least
very different from. Picking up stuff from my desk
or writing in the computer where the physical environment
is the object of my engagement, but in most
of those cases I mentioned, there is no physical
environment environment to engage with, so the attempt to
explain those other cases of cognitive processes that are
seemingly different. From that there are more than one,
there are different approaches to do that, but the
one that I favor is that once, and this
is not something that I created again, I defer
to the work of Dan Huto and Eric Min,
but once we managed to master symbolic use by,
uh, engaging in socio-cultural exchanges, something that we do
when we are very little. We enter this capacity
to manipulate symbols and symbols allows us to, uh,
symbols allow us to replace. Absent targets in our
cognitive performances. So, again, coming back to the, the,
the question about um how language is, uh, it
precedes representational abilities. The idea is that once we
manage to, to master symbolic uh structures, we can
use them as surrogates for absent targets. And this
is something that explains cognition from the bottom up
because we need to explain how certain engagements allow
for the mastering of of a language and how
those exchanges happen at a very young age and
this of course must happen before we have any
sort of language so the idea is to explain
higher cognition, um. Not by assuming innate representational mechanisms
by, uh, which is of course would, which would
be much easier if we're doing that, but from
the bottom up and I think there are tools
to do that. I think we can, uh, explain
how we are capable to direct ourselves to absent
stuff by engaging in, uh. Uh, BY, by using
symbols as surrogate songs we have mastered though, they,
they use, the uses of those symbols.
OK, so I have one last question and I'm
still on the topic of higher cognition and to
explore one example of it here. How do you
approach rationality from a radically inactive cognition perspective?
Well, uh, this is, that's a That's a very
interesting question, thank you, Ricardo, because, uh, I came
up with the idea of radically inactive rationality as
a label. Uh, FOR something that I have found
is, is sparsely in the literature before. Uh, Susan
Hurley, 20 years before me. She had asked whether
the pragmatic turn in the cognitive sciences, the negative
turn, had any implications for what we call rationality,
and I believe it has, uh, implications for rationality
and as she did as well in her own
terms. So the idea is that philosophers are used
to think of rationality as a symbolic language-based procedure
that happens at the surface level of consciousness and
functions to motivate or justify decisions and beliefs. I
think this is only partially correct. Because it appeals
to a level of rationality that we become endowed
with. To the extent that we master, as I
said before, symbolic structures. But if that were the
case, if rationality is this, let's say the tip
of the iceberg phenomenon. Then much of what we
do cannot be considered rational according to the rational,
the, the, to the inactive approach because much of
what we do is not. Symbolic is not contentful,
it's a matter of direct engagement with the environment,
so. It creates a certain problem. Of matching those
two ideas, the, the, the classical idea of rationality
and what an activist, an activism claims that we
actually do when we engage with our environment, so
I suggest that we should reconceive rationality as a
kind of math ability that enhances adaptive behavior, one
that is not necessarily symbolic. But might be in
some cases that involve reasoning. Reasoning allows us to
enhance our socio-cultural adaptive behavior in order to defend
ourselves and motivate our point of view, but this
is again the tip of the iceberg. And this
mean ability to coordinate multi-level structures allows us, allows
organisms in general to optimize their engagements with the,
the environment. That was the idea in very broad
strokes. So To some extent rationality is a tool
that uh allows us to adapt to unforeseen circumstances,
and that's something we excel at, but we are
not the only living means capable of doing so
and the consequence for this is that if this
is correct, rationality is not something exclusively human, which
I, I, I think is a positive consequence because
it allows. To situate rationality in this naturalization, uh,
continuum where, well, other organisms adapt in. Sort of
ways that we would consider them partially or almost
as rational as us and it works if you
consider for instance other large primates and other uh
sufficiently complex organisms and also on the other hand
if you have an organism that is critically unable
to overcome environmental circumstances that are outside of its.
It is, uh, immediate set of abilities. It, it
is fated, fated to, to, to die in there.
So you wouldn't say that it is highly rational.
It is very limited. I think about, for instance,
if you surround the snail with salt, it cannot
go either way. It's stuck there and it is
going to, to die eventually, but more complex organisms
develop ways to. To counteract the environmental circumstances, and
I think this is a very minimal account of
rationality that is not, well, it's not. Mainstream, of
course, but I think it accounts for. Different problems,
conceptual problems, and allows for a naturalization of rationality
as well, so. That's how I understand it.
Mhm. Great. So, Doctor Rolla, just before we go,
would you like to tell people where they can
find you and your work on the internet?
Well, um, you can find my website, which is,
uh, well, I'll give you the address and you
can put on the link description. Uh, THAT'S where
I put all my latest work and some, uh,
thoughts, some non- philosophical thoughts as well, and that's
where, uh, basically all my, my stuff is.
OK, great. I will include that in the description
of the interview and thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a very interesting conversation.
Thank you, it was a pleasure, Ricardo. Thank you
so much for having me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegeru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel Pan
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith,
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.